# A Data Science approach to predicting future suicide attempts with a large national US survey.

This repository contains all code used to generate results for this project.

## Abstract:

There has been extensive work to identify suicide risk factors and improve prediction in clinical settings. A recent meta-analysis of 365 studies to predict suicidal behavior found that only using suicide risk factors leads to slightly better than chance prediction. As a result, there has been a call to shift in focus from risk factors to machine learning-based risk algorithms.  We present a data science approach for predicting future suicide attempts using complex survey data. Our framework consists of initial data analysis, model development, assessment, visualization, and deployment for prediction.  We used the balanced random forest algorithm for predictive modeling. Data come from the National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions (NESARC) Wave 1 and 2. The response rate at Wave 2 was 70.2% resulting in a final sample size of N = 34,653. At wave 2, N = 222 participants endorsed having attempted suicide since the previous interview three years prior.  In total, the survey contained 2978 variables. As skip patterns were prevalent in the data, the minimum number of items a participant could have answered is 464. The final predictive model yielded a cross-validated AUC of 0.857. We identified four risk groups based on positive predictive value. The most important variables were previous suicidal ideation, previous suicide attempts, recent low energy and mood periods, age, education, and recent major financial crisis.  We visualized the relationship between our risk groups and the most important predictors. Our results suggest that we can extend conventional machine learning methods under a data science pipeline to the architecture of complex surveys for predicting suicide. This algorithmic approach can be used in future studies to target interventions for high-risk patients.
